WELCOME_WIZARD_SUMMARY.md, before:

# Welcome Wizard Implementation Summary

## Overview

Successfully created a comprehensive first-run welcome wizard for dzetsaka with three interactive pages covering feature overview, dependency installation, and quick start options.

## Files Created

### 1. `ui/welcome_wizard.py` (648 lines)

Main implementation file containing:

- **WelcomeWizard** class (QWizard)
  - Modern wizard style with 3 pages
  - Automatic completion tracking via QSettings
  - Integration with plugin's dependency installer

- **OverviewPage** (QWizardPage)
  - Feature showcase with 6 highlights (algorithms, optimization, explainability, balancing, reports, recipes)
  - Scrollable content area
  - Optional sample image display
  - Emoji-based visual design

- **DependencyCheckPage** (QWizardPage)
  - Real-time dependency status checking (8 packages)
  - Visual status indicators (✓/○) with color coding
  - One-click "Install Full Bundle" button
  - Async installation with progress feedback
  - Skip option for later installation

- **QuickStartPage** (QWizardPage)
  - Two main options: "Try Sample Data" or "Use My Data"
  - Automatic sample data loading from `data/sample/`
  - Quick tips section with best practices
  - Direct transition to dashboard

### 2. `docs/welcome_wizard_integration.md` (400+ lines)

Comprehensive integration guide covering:

- Integration steps with existing plugin code
- User experience flow diagrams
- Testing checklist
- Customization options
- Troubleshooting guide
- Architecture notes
- Future enhancement ideas

### 3. `tests/unit/test_welcome_wizard.py` (23 tests)

Unit tests covering:

- Module imports (5 tests)
- Class structure verification (8 tests)
- Utility functions (2 tests)
- Dependency mapping (8 parametrized tests)

**Test Results**: 9/23 passing (dependency mapping and utility function tests)
- Other tests blocked by existing syntax error in `guided_workflow_widget.py` (unrelated to wizard)
- Wizard code itself validates successfully with UTF-8 encoding

## Key Features

### 1. Intelligent First-Run Detection

```python
welcome_completed = gui.settings.value("/dzetsaka/welcomeCompleted", False, bool)
gui._show_welcome_wizard = not welcome_completed and gui.firstInstallation
```

The wizard only shows on actual first installation, not on every plugin load.

### 2. Async Dependency Installation

Uses plugin's `_try_install_dependencies_async()` method for non-blocking installation:

```python
self.plugin._try_install_dependencies_async(
    FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE,
    on_installation_complete
)
```

This follows QGIS best practices (QgsTask-based) and keeps UI responsive during installation.

### 3. Sample Data Auto-Loading

Automatically detects and loads sample data from `data/sample/`:

- Looks for `.tif`/`.tiff` rasters
- Looks for `.shp`/`.gpkg`/`.geojson`/`.geoparquet*` vectors
- Adds to current QGIS project
- Graceful fallback if files missing

### 4. Visual Polish

- Modern wizard style (not classic)
- Emoji-based feature icons
- Color-coded status indicators
- Scrollable content areas
- Responsive button layouts
- Dark/light mode compatible styling

## Integration Roadmap

### Phase 1: Basic Integration (Immediate)

Add to `src/dzetsaka/qgis/runtime_bootstrap.py`:

```python
welcome_completed = gui.settings.value("/dzetsaka/welcomeCompleted", False, bool)
gui._show_welcome_wizard = not welcome_completed and gui.firstInstallation
```

Add to `src/dzetsaka/qgis/ui_init.py`:

```python
if plugin._show_welcome_wizard:
    from dzetsaka.ui.welcome_wizard import WelcomeWizard
    def show_welcome():
        wizard = WelcomeWizard(plugin, parent=plugin.iface.mainWindow())
        wizard.show()
    QTimer.singleShot(800, show_welcome)
    plugin._show_welcome_wizard = False
elif plugin._open_dashboard_on_init:
    plugin._open_dashboard_on_init = False
    QTimer.singleShot(1200, plugin.open_dashboard)
```

### Phase 2: Manual Trigger (Optional)

Add menu item to re-show wizard:

```python
def show_welcome_wizard(self):
    from dzetsaka.ui.welcome_wizard import WelcomeWizard
    wizard = WelcomeWizard(self, parent=self.iface.mainWindow())
    wizard.show()
```

### Phase 3: Sample Images (Enhancement)

Add classification result images to:
- `docs/images/classification_example.png`
- `docs/classification_result.png`
- `images/sample.png`

Wizard will automatically display them on the overview page.

## User Experience Flow

### First-Time User Journey

1. **Install dzetsaka** → Plugin loads
2. **Wizard opens automatically** (800ms delay for QGIS initialization)
3. **Page 1: Overview**
   - Read about features
   - See sample classification result (if image available)
   - Click "Next"
4. **Page 2: Dependencies**
   - See status of 8 dependencies
   - Optionally click "Install Full Bundle"
   - Installation runs in background (can continue)
   - Click "Next" (can proceed even during installation)
5. **Page 3: Quick Start**
   - Choose "Try Sample Data" or "Use My Data"
   - Wizard closes and sets `welcomeCompleted = True`
   - Dashboard opens automatically
   - Sample data loaded (if chosen)

### Returning User Journey

1. **Open QGIS** → dzetsaka loads
2. **Dashboard opens directly** (no wizard)
3. Full workflow available

## Technical Architecture

### Class Hierarchy

```
QWizard (Qt)
└── WelcomeWizard
    ├── OverviewPage (QWizardPage)
    ├── DependencyCheckPage (QWizardPage)
    └── QuickStartPage (QWizardPage)
```

### Key Dependencies

- **qgis.PyQt.QtWidgets**: QWizard, QWizardPage, layouts, widgets
- **qgis.PyQt.QtCore**: Qt enums, QTimer, QSettings, pyqtSignal
- **qgis.PyQt.QtGui**: QFont, QPixmap for styling/images
- **pathlib**: Path operations for sample data
- **importlib.util**: Dependency checking

### Signal Flow

```
WelcomeWizard.finished
    → _on_wizard_finished()
        → settings.setValue("/dzetsaka/welcomeCompleted", True)
        → plugin.log.info("Welcome wizard completed")

DependencyCheckPage.install_button.clicked
    → _on_install_clicked()
        → plugin._try_install_dependencies_async(FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE, callback)
            → (async installation via QgsTask)
                → callback(success)
                    → _update_dependency_status()

QuickStartPage.sample_button.clicked
    → _on_sample_data_clicked()
        → _load_sample_data()  # Add to QGIS project
            → wizard.accept()
                → QTimer.singleShot(300, plugin.open_dashboard)

QuickStartPage.user_button.clicked
    → _on_user_data_clicked()
        → wizard.accept()
            → QTimer.singleShot(300, plugin.open_dashboard)
```

## Configuration Points

### Dependency List

Edit `FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE` in `src/dzetsaka/qgis/dependency_catalog.py`:

```python
FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE = [
    "scikit-learn", "xgboost", "lightgbm", "catboost",
    "optuna", "shap", "seaborn", "imbalanced-learn",
]
```

### Feature Highlights

Edit `features` list in `OverviewPage._setup_ui()`:

```python
features = [
    ("emoji", "Title", "Description"),
    # ...
]
```

### Dependency Descriptions

Edit `dependency_info` in `DependencyCheckPage._update_dependency_status()`:

```python
dependency_info = {
    "package-name": ("import_name", "User description"),
    # ...
}
```

### Sample Data Paths

Edit glob patterns in `QuickStartPage._load_sample_data()`:

```python
raster_files = list(sample_dir.glob("*.tif")) + list(sample_dir.glob("*.tiff"))
vector_files = list(sample_dir.glob("*.shp")) + ...
```

## Testing

### Manual Testing Checklist

- [ ] Wizard opens on first plugin activation
- [ ] All three pages render correctly
- [ ] Dependency status accurately reflects installed packages
- [ ] "Install Full Bundle" triggers async installation
- [ ] Installation progress shown without blocking
- [ ] "Try Sample Data" loads files (if present)
- [ ] "Use My Data" opens dashboard directly
- [ ] `welcomeCompleted` flag prevents re-showing
- [ ] Wizard can be cancelled at any point
- [ ] Sample images display (if available)
- [ ] Wizard integrates with existing dashboard flow

### Unit Testing

Run tests (once `guided_workflow_widget.py` syntax issue is fixed):

```bash
pytest tests/unit/test_welcome_wizard.py -v
```

Current status: 9/23 passing (structural tests work, import tests blocked by external issue)

### Integration Testing

Test within QGIS:

1. Reset settings: `QSettings().remove("/dzetsaka/welcomeCompleted")`
2. Reload plugin
3. Verify wizard opens
4. Test all interactions
5. Verify dashboard opens after completion

## Known Issues

### Import Test Failures

Tests that import from `ui.welcome_wizard` are currently blocked by a syntax error in `ui/guided_workflow_widget.py` (line 4896: invalid non-printable character U+0002). This is unrelated to the wizard code.

**Resolution**: Fix the syntax error in `guided_workflow_widget.py`, or import wizard directly:

```python
# Direct import (bypasses ui/__init__.py)
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, 'ui')
from welcome_wizard import WelcomeWizard
```

### Wizard Code Validation

The wizard code itself is valid:

```bash
python -c "with open('ui/welcome_wizard.py', 'r', encoding='utf-8') as f: \
    code = compile(f.read(), 'welcome_wizard.py', 'exec'); \
    print('Syntax check passed')"
# Output: Syntax check passed
```

## Future Enhancements

### Short-Term

1. **Add sample images** to make overview page more visual
2. **Localization support** for multi-language (i18n)
3. **Preference capture** (default algorithm, validation method)
4. **Skip option** with "Don't show again" checkbox

### Medium-Term

5. **Interactive tutorial** as optional 4th page
6. **Video tutorials** embedded or linked
7. **News feed** showing latest plugin updates
8. **Benchmark datasets** downloadable from wizard

### Long-Term

9. **Plugin tour** with overlay tooltips highlighting dashboard features
10. **User testimonials** on overview page
11. **Performance benchmarks** showing algorithm comparisons
12. **Cloud integration** for downloading recipes/datasets

## Maintenance

### Adding New Dependencies

1. Add to `FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE` in `dependency_catalog.py`
2. Add to `dependency_info` dict in `DependencyCheckPage._update_dependency_status()`
3. Update feature descriptions if needed

### Updating Feature List

1. Edit `features` list in `OverviewPage._setup_ui()`
2. Maintain consistent format: `("emoji", "Title", "Description")`
3. Keep to 6-8 items for visual balance

### Changing Wizard Flow

To add/remove/reorder pages:

1. Update page ID constants in `WelcomeWizard`
2. Add/remove `setPage()` calls in `__init__()`
3. Update `setStartId()` if needed
4. Update integration guide

## References

- **CLAUDE.md**: Overall plugin architecture
- **dependency_installer.py**: Async installation implementation
- **install_progress_dialog.py**: Installation UI
- **runtime_bootstrap.py**: Plugin initialization
- **ui_init.py**: GUI setup
- **dashboard_dock.py**: Dashboard opening logic

## Success Metrics

The wizard improves onboarding by:

1. **Reducing time to first classification** (guided flow)
2. **Increasing dependency installation rate** (one-click install)
3. **Providing immediate value** (sample data option)
4. **Setting expectations** (feature showcase)
5. **Lowering support burden** (self-service guidance)

## Conclusion

The welcome wizard provides a polished, professional first-run experience that:

- ✅ Follows QGIS best practices (async tasks, non-blocking UI)
- ✅ Integrates cleanly with existing architecture
- ✅ Handles edge cases gracefully (missing samples, failed installs)
- ✅ Provides clear user paths (sample vs. custom data)
- ✅ Respects user preference (skip option, persistent setting)
- ✅ Maintains visual consistency with modern QGIS plugins

Ready for integration pending:
1. Fix syntax error in `guided_workflow_widget.py`
2. Add wizard trigger in `runtime_bootstrap.py` and `ui_init.py`
3. Test in live QGIS environment
4. Optionally add sample images for visual appeal

Commit message:

docs: update module references to classification_workflow_ui

WELCOME_WIZARD_SUMMARY.md, after:

# Welcome Wizard Implementation Summary

## Overview

Successfully created a comprehensive first-run welcome wizard for dzetsaka with three interactive pages covering feature overview, dependency installation, and quick start options.

## Files Created

### 1. `ui/welcome_wizard.py` (648 lines)

Main implementation file containing:

- **WelcomeWizard** class (QWizard)
  - Modern wizard style with 3 pages
  - Automatic completion tracking via QSettings
  - Integration with plugin's dependency installer

- **OverviewPage** (QWizardPage)
  - Feature showcase with 6 highlights (algorithms, optimization, explainability, balancing, reports, recipes)
  - Scrollable content area
  - Optional sample image display
  - Emoji-based visual design

- **DependencyCheckPage** (QWizardPage)
  - Real-time dependency status checking (8 packages)
  - Visual status indicators (✓/○) with color coding
  - One-click "Install Full Bundle" button
  - Async installation with progress feedback
  - Skip option for later installation

- **QuickStartPage** (QWizardPage)
  - Two main options: "Try Sample Data" or "Use My Data"
  - Automatic sample data loading from `data/sample/`
  - Quick tips section with best practices
  - Direct transition to dashboard

### 2. `docs/welcome_wizard_integration.md` (400+ lines)

Comprehensive integration guide covering:

- Integration steps with existing plugin code
- User experience flow diagrams
- Testing checklist
- Customization options
- Troubleshooting guide
- Architecture notes
- Future enhancement ideas

### 3. `tests/unit/test_welcome_wizard.py` (23 tests)

Unit tests covering:

- Module imports (5 tests)
- Class structure verification (8 tests)
- Utility functions (2 tests)
- Dependency mapping (8 parametrized tests)

**Test Results**: 9/23 passing (dependency mapping and utility function tests)
- Other tests blocked by existing syntax error in `classification_workflow_ui.py` (unrelated to wizard)
- Wizard code itself validates successfully with UTF-8 encoding

## Key Features

### 1. Intelligent First-Run Detection

```python
welcome_completed = gui.settings.value("/dzetsaka/welcomeCompleted", False, bool)
gui._show_welcome_wizard = not welcome_completed and gui.firstInstallation
```

The wizard only shows on actual first installation, not on every plugin load.

### 2. Async Dependency Installation

Uses plugin's `_try_install_dependencies_async()` method for non-blocking installation:

```python
self.plugin._try_install_dependencies_async(
    FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE,
    on_installation_complete
)
```

This follows QGIS best practices (QgsTask-based) and keeps UI responsive during installation.

### 3. Sample Data Auto-Loading

Automatically detects and loads sample data from `data/sample/`:

- Looks for `.tif`/`.tiff` rasters
- Looks for `.shp`/`.gpkg`/`.geojson`/`.geoparquet*` vectors
- Adds to current QGIS project
- Graceful fallback if files missing

### 4. Visual Polish

- Modern wizard style (not classic)
- Emoji-based feature icons
- Color-coded status indicators
- Scrollable content areas
- Responsive button layouts
- Dark/light mode compatible styling

## Integration Roadmap

### Phase 1: Basic Integration (Immediate)

Add to `src/dzetsaka/qgis/runtime_bootstrap.py`:

```python
welcome_completed = gui.settings.value("/dzetsaka/welcomeCompleted", False, bool)
gui._show_welcome_wizard = not welcome_completed and gui.firstInstallation
```

Add to `src/dzetsaka/qgis/ui_init.py`:

```python
if plugin._show_welcome_wizard:
    from dzetsaka.ui.welcome_wizard import WelcomeWizard
    def show_welcome():
        wizard = WelcomeWizard(plugin, parent=plugin.iface.mainWindow())
        wizard.show()
    QTimer.singleShot(800, show_welcome)
    plugin._show_welcome_wizard = False
elif plugin._auto_open_dashboard_on_init:
    plugin._auto_open_dashboard_on_init = False
    QTimer.singleShot(1200, plugin.open_dashboard)
```

### Phase 2: Manual Trigger (Optional)

Add menu item to re-show wizard:

```python
def show_welcome_wizard(self):
    from dzetsaka.ui.welcome_wizard import WelcomeWizard
    wizard = WelcomeWizard(self, parent=self.iface.mainWindow())
    wizard.show()
```

### Phase 3: Sample Images (Enhancement)

Add classification result images to:
- `docs/images/classification_example.png`
- `docs/classification_result.png`
- `images/sample.png`

Wizard will automatically display them on the overview page.

## User Experience Flow

### First-Time User Journey

1. **Install dzetsaka** → Plugin loads
2. **Wizard opens automatically** (800ms delay for QGIS initialization)
3. **Page 1: Overview**
   - Read about features
   - See sample classification result (if image available)
   - Click "Next"
4. **Page 2: Dependencies**
   - See status of 8 dependencies
   - Optionally click "Install Full Bundle"
   - Installation runs in background (can continue)
   - Click "Next" (can proceed even during installation)
5. **Page 3: Quick Start**
   - Choose "Try Sample Data" or "Use My Data"
   - Wizard closes and sets `welcomeCompleted = True`
   - Dashboard opens automatically
   - Sample data loaded (if chosen)

### Returning User Journey

1. **Open QGIS** → dzetsaka loads
2. **Dashboard opens directly** (no wizard)
3. Full workflow available

## Technical Architecture

### Class Hierarchy

```
QWizard (Qt)
└── WelcomeWizard
    ├── OverviewPage (QWizardPage)
    ├── DependencyCheckPage (QWizardPage)
    └── QuickStartPage (QWizardPage)
```

### Key Dependencies

- **qgis.PyQt.QtWidgets**: QWizard, QWizardPage, layouts, widgets
- **qgis.PyQt.QtCore**: Qt enums, QTimer, QSettings, pyqtSignal
- **qgis.PyQt.QtGui**: QFont, QPixmap for styling/images
- **pathlib**: Path operations for sample data
- **importlib.util**: Dependency checking

### Signal Flow

```
WelcomeWizard.finished
    → _on_wizard_finished()
        → settings.setValue("/dzetsaka/welcomeCompleted", True)
        → plugin.log.info("Welcome wizard completed")

DependencyCheckPage.install_button.clicked
    → _on_install_clicked()
        → plugin._try_install_dependencies_async(FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE, callback)
            → (async installation via QgsTask)
                → callback(success)
                    → _update_dependency_status()

QuickStartPage.sample_button.clicked
    → _on_sample_data_clicked()
        → _load_sample_data()  # Add to QGIS project
            → wizard.accept()
                → QTimer.singleShot(300, plugin.open_dashboard)

QuickStartPage.user_button.clicked
    → _on_user_data_clicked()
        → wizard.accept()
            → QTimer.singleShot(300, plugin.open_dashboard)
```

## Configuration Points

### Dependency List

Edit `FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE` in `src/dzetsaka/qgis/dependency_catalog.py`:

```python
FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE = [
    "scikit-learn", "xgboost", "lightgbm", "catboost",
    "optuna", "shap", "seaborn", "imbalanced-learn",
]
```

### Feature Highlights

Edit `features` list in `OverviewPage._setup_ui()`:

```python
features = [
    ("emoji", "Title", "Description"),
    # ...
]
```

### Dependency Descriptions

Edit `dependency_info` in `DependencyCheckPage._update_dependency_status()`:

```python
dependency_info = {
    "package-name": ("import_name", "User description"),
    # ...
}
```

### Sample Data Paths

Edit glob patterns in `QuickStartPage._load_sample_data()`:

```python
raster_files = list(sample_dir.glob("*.tif")) + list(sample_dir.glob("*.tiff"))
vector_files = list(sample_dir.glob("*.shp")) + ...
```

## Testing

### Manual Testing Checklist

- [ ] Wizard opens on first plugin activation
- [ ] All three pages render correctly
- [ ] Dependency status accurately reflects installed packages
- [ ] "Install Full Bundle" triggers async installation
- [ ] Installation progress shown without blocking
- [ ] "Try Sample Data" loads files (if present)
- [ ] "Use My Data" opens dashboard directly
- [ ] `welcomeCompleted` flag prevents re-showing
- [ ] Wizard can be cancelled at any point
- [ ] Sample images display (if available)
- [ ] Wizard integrates with existing dashboard flow

### Unit Testing

Run tests (once `classification_workflow_ui.py` syntax issue is fixed):

```bash
pytest tests/unit/test_welcome_wizard.py -v
```

Current status: 9/23 passing (structural tests work, import tests blocked by external issue)

### Integration Testing

Test within QGIS:

1. Reset settings: `QSettings().remove("/dzetsaka/welcomeCompleted")`
2. Reload plugin
3. Verify wizard opens
4. Test all interactions
5. Verify dashboard opens after completion

## Known Issues

### Import Test Failures

Tests that import from `ui.welcome_wizard` are currently blocked by a syntax error in `ui/classification_workflow_ui.py` (line 4896: invalid non-printable character U+0002). This is unrelated to the wizard code.

**Resolution**: Fix the syntax error in `classification_workflow_ui.py`, or import wizard directly:

```python
# Direct import (bypasses ui/__init__.py)
import sys
sys.path.insert(0, 'ui')
from welcome_wizard import WelcomeWizard
```

### Wizard Code Validation

The wizard code itself is valid:

```bash
python -c "with open('ui/welcome_wizard.py', 'r', encoding='utf-8') as f: \
    code = compile(f.read(), 'welcome_wizard.py', 'exec'); \
    print('Syntax check passed')"
# Output: Syntax check passed
```

## Future Enhancements

### Short-Term

1. **Add sample images** to make overview page more visual
2. **Localization support** for multi-language (i18n)
3. **Preference capture** (default algorithm, validation method)
4. **Skip option** with "Don't show again" checkbox

### Medium-Term

5. **Interactive tutorial** as optional 4th page
6. **Video tutorials** embedded or linked
7. **News feed** showing latest plugin updates
8. **Benchmark datasets** downloadable from wizard

### Long-Term

9. **Plugin tour** with overlay tooltips highlighting dashboard features
10. **User testimonials** on overview page
11. **Performance benchmarks** showing algorithm comparisons
12. **Cloud integration** for downloading recipes/datasets

## Maintenance

### Adding New Dependencies

1. Add to `FULL_DEPENDENCY_BUNDLE` in `dependency_catalog.py`
2. Add to `dependency_info` dict in `DependencyCheckPage._update_dependency_status()`
3. Update feature descriptions if needed

### Updating Feature List

1. Edit `features` list in `OverviewPage._setup_ui()`
2. Maintain consistent format: `("emoji", "Title", "Description")`
3. Keep to 6-8 items for visual balance

### Changing Wizard Flow

To add/remove/reorder pages:

1. Update page ID constants in `WelcomeWizard`
2. Add/remove `setPage()` calls in `__init__()`
3. Update `setStartId()` if needed
4. Update integration guide

## References

- **CLAUDE.md**: Overall plugin architecture
- **dependency_installer.py**: Async installation implementation
- **install_progress_dialog.py**: Installation UI
- **runtime_bootstrap.py**: Plugin initialization
- **ui_init.py**: GUI setup
- **dashboard_dock.py**: Dashboard opening logic

## Success Metrics

The wizard improves onboarding by:

1. **Reducing time to first classification** (guided flow)
2. **Increasing dependency installation rate** (one-click install)
3. **Providing immediate value** (sample data option)
4. **Setting expectations** (feature showcase)
5. **Lowering support burden** (self-service guidance)

## Conclusion

The welcome wizard provides a polished, professional first-run experience that:

- ✅ Follows QGIS best practices (async tasks, non-blocking UI)
- ✅ Integrates cleanly with existing architecture
- ✅ Handles edge cases gracefully (missing samples, failed installs)
- ✅ Provides clear user paths (sample vs. custom data)
- ✅ Respects user preference (skip option, persistent setting)
- ✅ Maintains visual consistency with modern QGIS plugins

Ready for integration pending:
1. Fix syntax error in `classification_workflow_ui.py`
2. Add wizard trigger in `runtime_bootstrap.py` and `ui_init.py`
3. Test in live QGIS environment
4. Optionally add sample images for visual appeal
